The F-35 Lightning II is a fifth-generation multirole fighter aircraft developed by Lockheed Martin. It comprises three variants: the F-35A conventional takeoff and landing (CTOL), the F-35B short takeoff/vertical landing (STOVL), and the F-35C carrier-based variant. One of its defining features is its stealth capabilities, achieved through advanced design techniques that minimize radar cross-section and infrared signature, enhancing survivability in hostile environments.

Equipped with a sophisticated suite of avionics and sensors, the F-35 boasts state-of-the-art technology, including an active electronically scanned array (AESA) radar, electro-optical targeting system (EOTS), distributed aperture system (DAS), and electronic warfare (EW) suite. These systems provide pilots with unparalleled situational awareness, enhancing their ability to execute a variety of missions ranging from air superiority to ground attack and reconnaissance.

A key aspect of the F-35 program is its emphasis on commonality across variants, aimed at reducing costs and simplifying logistics. While each variant possesses unique features tailored to its specific mission requirements, they share a high degree of commonality in terms of airframe, avionics, and software. This approach facilitates interoperability and ease of maintenance across the F-35 fleet.

Despite its technological advancements, the F-35 program has encountered challenges throughout its development and testing phases, including technical issues, cost overruns, and schedule delays. However, the program has also achieved significant milestones, with many aircraft delivered to partner nations and operational units. Operational deployments of the F-35 have showcased its capabilities in various exercises and missions, highlighting its role as a key asset in modern air warfare.

Despite criticisms and controversies surrounding its cost, performance, and program management, the F-35 remains a cornerstone of military aviation technology, contributing to the capabilities of air forces worldwide. Its ongoing evolution and operational deployments underscore its importance as a versatile and potent asset in the modern battlefield.

According to some pilots, 2 F-35s could defeat 4 F-16s due to the F-35's superior detection systems and advanced missiles.